[Music]
hey there when you picture an airplane a
pretty familiar shape comes to mind a
long narrow body with two main wings
sticking out from the middle a pair of
smaller wings on the back end and a tail
fin in the rear sticking straight up the
wings may be straight or swept to the
back but you wouldn't picture them
sweeping forward would you sure some
fighters have wings that change position
and older planes might have an extra
pair in the front but you wouldn't have
a backward wing well tell that to the
x-29 this experimental aircraft was
developed by NASA and the US Air Force
back in 1984 that's right this strange
little plane isn't a leftover Star Wars
prop but an actual prototype developed
by the Grumman aerospace corporation for
the US military and space program only
two were ever built but the x29 wasn't
the first or only plane to look like
someone misread the instruction on their
lego set the concept of forward swept
wings dates all the way back to the ju
287 developed in the 1940s and many
countries have experimented with this
format over the years the flaw that kept
it from mainstream use after decades of
trying is that a plane with forward
swept wings can be a real nightmare for
the person flying it this was such a
problem that the x-29 needed to be made
from state-of-the-art composite
materials just to somewhat mitigate that
problem I mean just look at this thing
I'm surprised anyone was able to fly it
at all with such an obvious design flaw
why have so many people tried for so
long to make it work well before I can
really answer that we need to understand
what the designers were trying to
achieve in the first place look at any
plane develop before the advent of jet
engines and you'll notice that almost
all of them position their wings at a
right angle to the body of the aircraft
this works great for any aircraft flying
less than 460 miles per hour but causes
trouble for anything moving faster than
that you see an aircraft's wings are
shaped so that there's a higher air
pressure on the underside than above
this is one of the mechanisms that
contribute to a plane's ability to
produce left as a side effect of this
phenomenon the air moves across the wing
faster than the plane itself moves
through the air build up enough speed
and the top of the wings can break the
sound barrier even if the aircraft as a
whole wasn't designed to this creates a
shock wave on the top of the wing which
disturbs the air behind it this reduces
the amount of lift the forward wings can
generate while increasing the lift
produced by the rear wings as a result
the plane's nose is forced down causing
it to lose altitude and gain additional
speed making the problem even worse when
this happens even experience test pilots
have been unable to regain control the
first aircraft to experience this
problem was the excitingly named and
strange-looking p-38 lightning despite
or maybe because of looking like some
engineers got bored and bolted three
planes together it was one of the
fastest aircraft in the world when his
debuted in 1939 to compensate for the
plane's wings occasionally going
supersonic engineers installed a unique
flap on the underside of the wings known
as a dive flap this device could be
deployed during a dive to generate
additional lift underneath the front
wings the p38 only encountered this
particular problem when flying at
maximum speed
but as planes started moving faster and
faster a more permanent solution needed
to be found enter the swept wing
unlike straight wings where 100% of the
airflow moves parallel to the body of
the plane swept wings create a stream of
air running lengthwise down the wing
this is known to aircraft designers as
span-wise flow and unlike the air moving
across the top of the wings it doesn't
accelerate beyond the planes current
speed incidentally the air moving across
the top of the wing is called the chord
wise flow named after the chord an
imaginary line that goes from the front
to the rear edge of the wings it's not
as I expected the direction your phone's
charging cable would fly if you hurled
it out a window in frustration
I've been there even if you managed to
hold back any battery related tantrums
it can be pretty easy to lose something
on a fly why don't you tell me in the
comments what was the worst thing you
ever lost on a fly doesn't even need to
be on an airplane drop your phone while
taking a selfie in a hot-air balloon I
definitely want to hear about that now
where was I oh yeah at low speeds
aircraft want as much cord flow as
possible to maximize lift but as they
accelerate closer and closer to the
speed of sound a little over seven
hundred sixty-seven miles per hour if
you're keeping score the span-wise flow
becomes more and more desirable some
military jets such as the American f-14
Tomcat and Russian MIG 23 can change the
angle of their wings to take advantage
of this effect other air and spacecraft
such as the Avro Vulcan and NASA's Space
Shuttle use triangular delta wings
instead to solve the same problem these
are more reliable but come at the cost
of adding drag the issue that has yet to
be resolved is that the further back the
wings of a plane are swept the more
susceptible it is to a stall when pilots
used the word stall they aren't using it
in the same way you would if your car's
engine seized up in aviation a stall is
when the amount of air moving across the
wing is less than needed to produce the
necessary amount of lift since the
entire point of swept wings is to reduce
the amount of air flow you can see why
this might become a problem a stall can
result in the pilot losing control of
the plane this brings us to the reason
why so many people have tried so hard
and for so long to make forward-swept
wings a viable option in rear swept
wings the span-wise flow carries air
toward the tips of the wings away from
the body of the plane as a result when a
stall occurs it begins at the tip of the
wings and moves inward making it
difficult for the pilot to maintain
control however if the wings were shaped
in a way that carried air towards the
fuselage the stall would begin closer to
the body of the plane
as a result air would still be moving
across the flaps position further down
the wing allowing the pilot to remain in
control this wouldn't eliminate the risk
presented by a stall but it would still
go a long way to improving aircraft
safety think of forward swept wings as
training wheels on a bicycle
they aren't guaranteed to keep you from
falling but still make it easier to stay
in control if you start to get off
balance where that analogy breaks down
is when we run into the stability issues
I mentioned way back at the beginning of
this video
well forward swept wings reduce drag
quite significantly they're unusual
aerodynamic properties subject them to a
twisting motion as they move through the
air it wasn't until the 1980s that
aircraft technology advanced to the
point where we could construct wings
able to endure this kind of pressure
reliably this brings us back to the x29
the shining pinnacle of early 80's
aircraft technology using
state-of-the-art materials designed by
NASA and the most sophisticated flight
computers money could buy the Air Force
hoped they might have finally cracked
the code to stable forward swept wings
and they were entirely right which is
why all planes today use forward swept
wings did that work I'm trying to see if
believing hard enough will make it true
in the airforce defense they came closer
than anyone else to producing a workable
version of this concept the ex 29s
flight computer made flying possible but
just barely even with the three onboard
computers making constant adjustments to
the planes handling test pilots still
struggled to keep the aircraft under
control making matters worse shortly
before a test flight one of the
prototypes malfunctioned causing all
three computers to fail simultaneously
oops if that had happened well in the
air there's little the pilot would have
been able to do to keep their plane
flying
ultimately the x-29 program came to an
end in 1991 while NASA and the US Air
Force learned a great deal from the
decade-long cycle of tests and tweaks a
practical design remained just out of
reach
still not everyone has given up on the
concept and the age of forward sweeping
aircraft could be just around the corner
hey maybe they should just you know wing
it so if you learn something new today
then keep it to yourself no wait you
should give the video a like and share
with a friend and here are some other
cool videos I think you'll enjoy just
click to the left or right and remember
you know what to do stay on the bright
side of life
[Music]